ayb (#10)
marcua/blog.marcua.net: _posts/2023-06-11-ayb-helping-you-own-your-data.md

Reviewer: Overall decide who the audience is. Whether it really is a student/journalist or a developer that wants to house databases for themselves with least effort, or some other use case.   For instance, for the student example below the actual audience is an instructor.

Author: Thank you for helping me realize/make the distinction between the instance administrator and the tenant. I also now limit references in the introduction to student/journalist to examples.

---
layout: post
title: 'ayb: Helping you own your data'
date: 2023-06-11 22:45 +0000
---
## Introduction

> Today's databases ubiquitous, but frustratingly inaccessible to most people. Your own data likely lives in thousands of databases at various companies and organizations, but if you wanted to create a database for yourself in which to store data and share it, you need the skills of both a system administrator and a software engineer. By virtue of the complexity of database management systems (and market forces), your data either lives in other people's databases or outside of a database in text files and spreadsheets.

Author: ```suggestion
Today's databases are ubiquitous, but frustratingly inaccessible to most people. Your own data likely lives in thousands of databases at various companies and organizations, but if you wanted to create a database for yourself in which to store data and share it, you need the skills of both a system administrator and a software engineer. By virtue of the complexity of database management systems (and market forces), your data either lives in other people's databases or outside of a database in text files and spreadsheets.
```

> Today's databases are ubiquitous, but frustratingly inaccessible to most people. Your own data likely lives in thousands of databases at various companies and organizations, but if you wanted to create a database for yourself in which to store data and share it, you need the skills of both a system administrator and a software engineer. By virtue of the complexity of database management systems (and market forces), your data either lives in other people's databases or outside of a database in text files and spreadsheets.

Reviewer 2: > By virtue of the complexity of database management systems (and market forces), your data either lives in other people's databases or outside of a database in text files and spreadsheets.

It sounds a bit like you're saying if databases were simpler we'd use them everywhere text files and spreadsheets are used today - but I know you don't mean that. I'm wondering if you can highlight some scenarios where people really do want a RDBMS but it is out of reach for them.

Would it be fair to say that this project is like a "self hosted AWS RDS"?

Reviewer: The last sentence gets to the point

Reviewer: But with trivially easy extraction and client scale beyond a node.

Author: I love the last sentence as well! I integrated a less branded version of it into the intro and walked back specific examples of file types to keep the focus of this paragraph on the problem rather than the solution.

> Three groups of people in particular feel the pain of databases being hard to set up: students that are just getting started, sharers like journalists and scientist who are experts in fields other than hosting databases, and anyone who wants to have sovereignty over their data but isn't sure how to get started. We'll dive into each of these groups more in [students, sharers, and sovereigns](#students-sharers-and-sovereigns).

Reviewer 2: Since you mention using sqlite below, is it really the set up that's difficult (`sqlite test.db`)? Or is it the complexity of learning SQL when you are already used to, say, using a spreadsheet GUI? (I actually find sql simpler than [spreadsheets](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tNWPGhzhdMg)).

Author: Thank you, added some clarifying language below!

> Three groups of people in particular feel the pain of databases being hard to set up: students that are just getting started, sharers like journalists and scientist who are experts in fields other than hosting databases, and anyone who wants to have sovereignty over their data but isn't sure how to get started. We'll dive into each of these groups more in [students, sharers, and sovereigns](#students-sharers-and-sovereigns).

Reviewer: The phrasing implies that this is designed for and best used by students journalists and sovereigns, rather than being generally useful for anyone that wants to throw up an rds.  Its like python  anywhere is heavily used in classes but its not Described as an educational product

Author: Good push. The audience is now in its own section and the introduction introduces them only as a concrete example. Thank you!

> 
> Three groups of people in particular feel the pain of databases being hard to set up: students that are just getting started, sharers like journalists and scientist who are experts in fields other than hosting databases, and anyone who wants to have sovereignty over their data but isn't sure how to get started. We'll dive into each of these groups more in [students, sharers, and sovereigns](#students-sharers-and-sovereigns).
> 
> I've been working on a project called [ayb](https://github.com/marcua/ayb), which is a relational database management system that makes it easier to to create databases, share them with collaborators, and query them from a web application or the command line. With `ayb`, [all your base can finally belong to you](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qItugh-fFgg). What does `ayb` offer?

Author: A nice idea from Eugene

```suggestion
To make this concrete, imagine a journalist or student that's looking to create a database around a new dataset and build a visualization they host on a website. Using existing database tools, they have to secure a machine, install Postgres/MySQL, update various configuration settings to allow incoming connections, and create and host a web application (likely managing another machine to accomplish this) to gatekeep the database credentials. Database-as-a-Service providers might reduce the administration overhead in this scenario, but they introduce new complexities like parameter groups and don't eliminate the complexity of the system needed to get up and running. What if our user could: 1) Register for an account on a service provided by their newsroom or school, 2) Issue a `create database` instruction and make their database publicly accessible in read only mode, and 3) Issue SQL from the command line or over HTTP through JavaScript?

Toward that vision, I've been working on a project called [ayb](https://github.com/marcua/ayb), which is a relational database management system that makes it easier to to create databases, share them with collaborators, and query them from a web application or the command line. With `ayb`, [all your base can finally belong to you](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qItugh-fFgg). What does `ayb` offer?
```

Author: Eugene:
* The key difference/constraint from a static page is that users should be able to update the data in the database.
* Make the distinction: There are two users. One is the user thay sets up ayb as a daas, and the other is the user that uses the ayb service to deploy an app purely in javascript/client. Basically it’s “roll your own hosted database service in one command”

> I've been working on a project called [ayb](https://github.com/marcua/ayb), which is a relational database management system that makes it easier to to create databases, share them with collaborators, and query them from a web application or the command line. With `ayb`, [all your base can finally belong to you](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qItugh-fFgg). What does `ayb` offer?

Reviewer: Can you use gitpod or something to add a button that launches an instance of ayb? Then the steps to try out are fork, click button, use in a page

Author: This is an awesome idea. I'll try to bring it into a v2!

In the rest of this article, you can:
* See `ayb` action in an [end-to-end example](#an-end-to-end-example)
* Better understand who `ayb` is for in [students, sharers, and sovereigns](#students-sharers-and-sovereigns).
* Learn [where to go from here](#where-to-go-from-here).

## An end-to-end example

### Installing
`ayb` is written in Rust, and is available as the `ayb` crate. Assuming you have [installed Rust on your machine](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install), installing `ayb` takes a single command:

```bash
cargo install ayb
```

### Running a server
An `ayb` server stores its metadata in [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/index.html) or [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/), and stores the databases it's hosting on a local disk. To configure the server, create an `ayb.toml` configuration file to tell the server what host/port to listen for connections on, how to connect to the database, and the data path for the hosted databases:

```bash

> cat <<EOF > ayb.toml

Author: Sofía: just show contents of file

{"fields":[],"rows":[]}

$ curl -w "\n" -X POST http://127.0.0.1:5433/v1/marcua/test.sqlite/query -d "SELECT * FROM favorite_databases;"

{"fields":["name","score"],"rows":[["PostgreSQL","10"],["SQLite","9"],["DuckDB","9"]]}
```

## Students, sharers, and sovereigns 
If `ayb` is successful, it will become easier to create a database, interact with it, and share it with relevant people/organizations. There are three groups that would benefit most from such a tool, and by studying the problems they face, we can make `ayb` more useful for them.

**Students**. The barrier to learn how to work with data is too high, and much of it is in operational overhead (how to set up a database? how to connect to it? how to share what I've learned?). Ideally, aside from registering for an account and creating a database, there should be no operational overhead to writing your first SQL query. It should be easy to fork a data set and start asking questions, and it should be easy to start inserting rows into your own small data set. If you get stuck, it should be easy to give a mentor or teacher access to your database and get some help.

> **Sharers**. Scientists, journalists, and other people who want to share a data set have largely ad hoc means to share that data, and their collaborators and readers' experience is limited by the ad hoc sharing decisions. You've encountered this if you've ever tried to do something with the CSV file someone shared over email or if you've wanted to visualize the data presented in an article in a slightly different way. Sharers should be able to create a database, add collaborators, and eventually open it up to the public to fork/query in a read-only way with as little overhead for themselves or the recipient as possible.

Reviewer 2: It might be nice for comparison to call out the differences with just sharing a data file vs ayb's data interface. The data file is nice in that consumers pay for their own compute, but ayb lets consumers automatically get updated data, etc.

Author: Good call! Added a note about the tradeoffs. Thank you!

## Where to go from here
Thank you for reading this far. From here, you can:
* Build your own database! It [takes minutes](https://github.com/marcua/ayb#getting-started)!
* Read more about what functionality is coming soon to `ayb` in the [Roadmap](https://github.com/marcua/ayb#roadmap).
* Make a contribution to the project, starting with the details on [how to contribute](https://github.com/marcua/ayb#contributing).
* Create an issue, email me, or reach out on social media to get started (my [contact information is here](https://marcua.net/) and I promise to be welcoming).

## Thank you

> Thank you to Daniel Haas, Eugene Wu, and Meredith Blumenstock for reading an early draft of this blog post.

Author: Meelap

> Thank you to Daniel Haas, Eugene Wu, and Meredith Blumenstock for reading an early draft of this blog post.

Author: ```suggestion
Thank you to Sofía Aritz, Meredith Blumenstock, Daniel Haas, Meelap Shah, and Eugene Wu and for reading and suggesting improvements to early drafts of this blog post.
```
